The Internet is a vast network that connects computers and other electronic devices worldwide. There are rules and protocols that govern the connectivity as well as applications that are made for that purpose. This article will explain what happens when there is a successful connection.

Different software and applications can access the internet, but the most common way is through the use of browser applications. These are softwares that act as the graphical interfaces or the ‘windows’ or ‘portals’ or our way around the internet.

The connectivity on the internet can be viewed as a two-way communication between a sender and a receiver. A sender requests information or data then the receiver responds. Typically they are known as client(sender) and server(receiver) and it involves millions of users at any single time. A server is a special-purpose computer that hosts files and applications that a client can request or have access to accomplish different tasks. In our case, we will be requesting information on the web browser to a server.

TCP/IP are rules that govern the connectivity and data transmission as the client and server communicate. All devices in the internet are identified by a special number called an IP address that looks like this “192.200.76.12”. To remember such a number, the internet has a naming system called a domain name system. This is where the hosts/servers are represented with familiar English-like names which are translated to their unique IP addresses whenever the users type in their domain name similar to how a phonebook stores numbers attached to people’s contacts. Once the connection is established, data is sent from the client to the server and vice versa using the transmission control protocol(TCP). This is where data is divided into smaller packets that are transmitted from the server to the receiver. The packets use different network routes to utilize the internet traffic but are reassembled back when they reach their destination.

When a user types in “google.com” and presses “enter” a series of actions take place namely;

i. First, a connection is established between the computer that sends the request and the receiving host. The connection for any two nodes on the internet is established by HTTPS which is a secure HyperText Transfer protocol or the unsecured version HTTP which is a HyperText Transfer protocol. The data in HTTPS is encrypted using a public key pair system between the computer and the server. Usually, the server has a private key which is only known to the server and a public key which is shared with anyone accessing the server. The computers that want to access the servers encrypt their data using the public key shared and the server decrypts the data using its private key. This makes sure that the connection is secure and anyone who taps the communication would need a private key they don’t have to access the information hence security is enforced.

The browser sends the request to the internet using a protocol known as Transmission Control Protocol/Internet protocol. This protocol specifies how two or more computers/devices interact over the internet. They also outline how data is packaged and sent from one computer to another. The request is encoded using packets of data.

The first destination is on a Domain Name Server. Here the name of the website is translated to its equivalent IP Address. Computers on the internet are identified using numbers referred to as IP addresses. Since they can be difficult for users to memorize for a dozen of sites, they are assigned domain names that users can easily remember. Same co

Once the address for google.com is obtained, the packet requesting the data is sent to the IP address of the host containing the domain google.com. Since google.com receives over a million requests in a single day, their host servers are designed in a way that all requests can be handled comfortably. They do this by using a load balancer. This is a special server or software that receives requests and selects the web server or application server that has less load to respond to the request. This also means that google has more load balancers and more web and application servers to mitigate in case any one of them fails. This way their services are rerouted to other routes and they don’t run to a halt.

The load balancers are fitted with a security layer called a firewall that has rules of what services or ports of the servers can be accessed by the public. Servers can be accessed using HTTPS on port 443 or HTTP on port 80 or SSH(secure shell) on port 22. It is the highest priority of the engineers at Google to only allow connections they want the public to access by setting rules at the firewall. IP addresses that are known to be security threats are also blocked on the firewall. By definition, we can refer to the firewall as a software or device that monitors and allows only authorized communications to occur and blocks unauthorized ones.

Once the request is authenticated, the load balancer selects the web server or application server which will respond to your request. It is equally important to note that the web, database, and application servers also pack in firewall software to check always the incoming and outgoing traffic. This way the layers of security are reinforced to prevent attacks from hackers. A web server would normally store static web pages and an application server deals with more dynamic data or requests that need calculations and querying of data. Since Google is a search engine, the server that responds to a varied number of requests would be an application server. In our case, we are requesting for the static page and a web server would be enough to respond to our request. The server gets the data and gives a response which is sent back to the address of the IP address requesting it(in this case the computer that typed https://www.google.com).

That marks a complete connection between a user and a server on the internet. We have requested a static page resource represented by a domain named “google.com”. However, if we are running an application and we need to store username and profile details and require more data, we would be served by a database linked to an application server or hosted as a database server. A database consists of data that is collected, organized, and stored for easy access.
And that is one of the ways the internet works for a single request.
